Add a first intro article to sharded tables (#56)
crate/crate-tutorials: docs/create-sharded-table.rst

.. _create-sharded-table:

====================
Create sharded table
====================

> One core concept CrateDB uses to distribute data across a cluster is sharding. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
One core concept CrateDB uses to distribute data across a cluster is :ref:`sharding <reference:ddl-sharding>`.
```

CrateDB splits every table into a configured number of shards, which are 

> distributed evenly across the cluster. You can think of shards as sub-tables 
> with corresponding sub-indexes. If we create a table like the following:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
distributed evenly across the cluster. You can think of shards as sub-tables. If we create a table like the following:
```

`index` is unfortunately a bit overloaded. It could be a ES index (which equals a shard), or it could refer to the index structures underneath. So we might want to avoid mentioning it here without a clarification to avoid confusion.

Reviewer 2: Actually, might also want to avoid using the `sub-tables` phrase here, so that it can be used to explain what a partition is.

"A shard is a self-contained part of a table", or something like that?

Author: How about

"You can think of shards as a self-contained part of a table, that includes both a subset of records and 
corresponding indexing structures."

> with corresponding sub-indexes. If we create a table like the following:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
with corresponding sub-indexes. If we :ref:`create a table <reference:sql_ddl_create>` like the following:
```

.. code-block:: psql

    CREATE TABLE first_table (
        ts TIMESTAMP,
        val DOUBLE PRECISION
    );

> The table is by default is split into 4 shards on a single node cluster. You 
> can check this by running:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The table is by default is split into several shards. How much exactly depends on the number of nodes in the cluster. You can check this by running:
```

Not sure if it's better - but rephrasing it would make the document more resilient against a change of the default value in CrateDB

.. code-block:: psql

    SHOW CREATE TABLE first_table;

Which should output the following:

.. code-block:: psql

    CREATE TABLE IF NOT EXISTS "doc"."first_table" (
        "ts" TIMESTAMP WITH TIME ZONE,
        "val" DOUBLE PRECISION
    )
    CLUSTERED INTO 4 SHARDS

By default, ingested data is distributed evenly across all available shards. In 
many cases you don't have to worry about specifying any sharding key or routing 

> column. 

Reviewer 2: It's not yet mentioned that users can specify a routing column, so this might surprise and confuse readers. 
Maybe it's better to mention that they could specify a routing column to have more control over the data distribution, but that it's usually not necessary and add a link to the CREATE TABLE statement reference?

Partitioning
============

> CrateDB also supports splitting up data across another dimension with 

Reviewer 2: Would probably make sense to also link to the partitioned table introduction we have in the reference documentation.

> partitioning. You can think of a partition as a set of shards. For each 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
:ref:`partitioning <reference:partitioned-tables>`. You can think of a partition as a set of shards. For each 
```

        ts TIMESTAMP,
        val DOUBLE PRECISION,
        part GENERATED ALWAYS AS date_trunc('month',ts)
    ) PARTITIONED BY(part);

When inserting a first row with the following statement:

.. code-block:: psql

    INSERT INTO second_table (ts,val) VALUES (1617823229974, 1.23);

and then querying for the total amount of shards for the table:

.. code-block:: psql

    SELECT COUNT(*) FROM sys.shards
    WHERE table_name = 'second_table';

We can see that the table is split into 4 shards.

Adding another row to the table with a different partition key (i.e. different 
month):

.. code-block:: psql

    INSERT INTO second_table (ts,val) VALUES (1620415701974, 2.31);

We can see that there are now 8 shards for the table ``second_table`` in the 
cluster.

.. danger::

    **Over-sharding and over-partitioning**

    Sharding can drastically improve the performance on large datasets. 
    However, having too many small shards will most likely degrade performance. 
    Over-sharding and over-partitioning are common flaws leading to an overall 
    poor performance.

    **As a rule of thumb, a single shard should hold somewhere between 5 - 100 
    GB of data.**

> 

Reviewer 2: Could also mention the default shard limit per node at this point.

.. tip::

    **Example**: You want to create a *partitioned table* on your *single node 
    cluster* to store time-series data with the following assumptions:

    - Inserts: 1.000 records / s
    - Record size: 128 byte / record
    - Throughput: 125 KB / s or 10.3 GB / day

    Depending on query patterns, a good partition key would most likely be the 
    extracted week or month (considering 4 shards per partition). This would 
    give an average shard size between 18 GB to 80 GB.

.. note::

    An optimal sharding and partitioning strategy is always depends on the 
    specific use case and should typically be determined by conducting 

>     benchmarks across various strategies.

Reviewer 2: Should we maybe even give a few more pointers here on what to look out for when sharding? Not sure how in-depth the tutorial should get and what should be left to the reference documentation.

I'm not sure if this is enough for a reader to understand what trade-offs they are making when they choose the partitioning column vs. number of shards.

Author: I think this should be part of a longer / deeper sharding/partioning guide (with more examples) 🤷

.. _create-sharded-table:

====================

> Create Sharded Table

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Create sharded table
```

====================

One core concept CrateDB uses to distribute data across a cluster is sharding. CrateDB splits every table into a configured number of shards, which are distributed evenly across the cluster. You can think of shards as sub-tables with corresponding sub-indexes. If we create a table like the following:

.. code-block:: psql

    CREATE TABLE first_table (
        ts TIMESTAMP,
        val DOUBLE PRECISION
    );

the table is by default is split into 4 shards on a single node cluster. You can check this by running:

.. code-block:: psql

    SHOW CREATE TABLE first_table;

Which should output the following:

.. code-block:: psql

    CREATE TABLE IF NOT EXISTS "doc"."first_table" (
        "ts" TIMESTAMP WITH TIME ZONE,
        "val" DOUBLE PRECISION
    )
    CLUSTERED INTO 4 SHARDS

By default, ingested data is distributed evenly across all available shards. In many cases you don't have to worry about specifying any sharding key or routing column. 

Partitioning

> =============

Reviewer: ```suggestion
============
```

> CrateDB also supports splitting up data across another dimension with partitioning. You can think of a partition as a set of shards. For each partition the number of shards defined by `CLUSTERED INTO x SHARDS` are created, when a first row with a specific partition key is inserted.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
CrateDB also supports splitting up data across another dimension with partitioning. You can think of a partition as a set of shards. For each partition the number of shards defined by ``CLUSTERED INTO x SHARDS`` are created, when a first row with a specific partition key is inserted.
```

> In the following example - which represents a very simple time-series use-case - we added another column `part` which automatically generates the current month upon insert from the `ts` column. The `part` column is further used as our `partition key`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In the following example - which represents a very simple time-series use-case - we added another column ``part`` which automatically generates the current month upon insert from the ``ts`` column. The ``part`` column is further used as the _partition key_.
```

.. code-block:: psql

    CREATE TABLE second_table (
        ts TIMESTAMP,
        val DOUBLE PRECISION,
        part GENERATED ALWAYS AS date_trunc('month',ts)
    ) PARTITIONED BY(part);

> If we now insert a first row with the following statement:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
When inserting a first row with the following statement:
```

.. code-block:: psql

    INSERT INTO second_table (ts,val) VALUES (1617823229974, 1.23);

> and then query for the total amount of shards for the table:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
and then querying for the total amount of shards for the table:
```

.. code-block:: psql

    SELECT COUNT(*) FROM sys.shards
    WHERE table_name = 'second_table';

We can see that the table is split into 4 shards.

> Adding another row to table with a different partition key (i.e. different month):

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Adding another row to the table with a different partition key (i.e. different month):
```

.. code-block:: psql

    INSERT INTO second_table (ts,val) VALUES (1620415701974, 2.31);

> We can see that there are now 8 shards for the table `second_table` in the cluster.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
We can see that there are now 8 shards for the table ``second_table`` in the cluster.
```

.. danger::

    **Over-sharding and over-partitioning**

>     Sharding can drastically improve the performance on large datasets, though too many small shards most likely affect the performance negatively. Over-sharding and over-partitioning are bad practices and lead to an overall poor performance.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    Sharding can drastically improve the performance on large datasets. However, having too many small shards will most likely degrade performance. Over-sharding and over-partitioning are common flaws leading to an overall poor performance.
```

>     **As a rule of thumb a single shard should hold somewhere between 5 - 100 GB of data.**

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    **As a rule of thumb, a single shard should hold somewhere between 5 - 100 GB of data.**
```

.. tip::

    **Example**: You want to create a *partitioned table* on your *single node cluster* to store time-series data with the following assumptions:

    - Inserts: 1.000 records / s
    - Record size: 128 byte / record
    - Throughput: 125 KB / s or 10.3 GB / day

>     Depending on query patterns, a good partition key would most likely be the extracted week or month (considering 4 shards per partition). This would lead to an average shard size between 18 GB to 80 GB.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    Depending on query patterns, a good partition key would most likely be the extracted week or month (considering 4 shards per partition). This would give an average shard size between 18 GB to 80 GB.
```

.. note::

>     An optimum sharding and partitioning strategy is always dependant on the use case and typically should be found by conducting benchmarks across various strategies.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    An optimal sharding and partitioning strategy always depends on the specific use case and should typically be determined by conducting benchmarks across various strategies.
```
